README.md, before:

# RoleVM

RoleVM is a minimal, efficient role-based programming runtime for Java, based on
`java.lang.invoke` and `jdk.dynalink`. It is entirely written in Java and consists of a small Java
agent and an accompanying runtime library.

## How does it work?

- The RoleVM agent replaces every `invoke{interface,virtual}` instruction in all loaded Java
  classes (except in some blacklisted packages) with equivalent `invokedynamic` instructions. We
  refer to such modified call sites as dynamic call sites.
- At each dynamic call site, a sender argument is pushed to the stack as an additional argument,
  which will later be used during dynamic method dispatch, e.g., to detect base calls or support
  multiple roles per player in a future version of RoleVM.
- Dynamic method dispatch takes sender, receiver and bound roles into account and "jumps" to the
  matching method implementation. The additional sender argument is dropped after the dispatch
  decision has been made.
- A *polymorphic inline cache* is used to cache dispatch decisions at the call site.

For more details, please read the Javadocs. An aggregated Javadoc for all Maven subprojects can be
generated using `mvn javadoc:aggregate`.

## Build

The library is not yet available on Maven Central. You have to build and install it locally using
`mvn install` (requires JDK 9).

Furthermore, it is decoupled into multiple subprojects:

    rolevm
    ├── rolevm-agent
    ├── rolevm-api
    ├── rolevm-bench
    ├── rolevm-examples
    └── rolevm-runtime

The `rolevm-{bench,examples}` submodules are non-essential modules and contain benchmarks and usage
examples.

## Usage

The best way to see RoleVM in action is to take a look at the demos in the `rolevm-examples`
subproject.

### Maven coordinates

First, to use the library, you have to declare a `provided` dependency on the `rolevm-api` Maven
artifact:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.github.martinmo.rolevm</groupId>
  <artifactId>rolevm-api</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
```

### Role and Base annotations

The RoleVM API can bind roles to arbitrary objects, and base and role types are *not* required to
implement some particular interface or extend a particular class. Instead, role types are annotated
using `@Role` and `@Base` annotations:

```java
import rolevm.api.*;
public @Role class RoleType {
  private @Base BaseType base;
}
```

#### Around, Before, After and Replace

Suppose you have a class `A` that you want to use as a base:

```java
public class A {
  public int m(int x) {
    return x * x;
  }
}
```

Then the accompanying, minimum role definition looks like this:

```java
public @Role class R {
  private @Base A base;
}
```

To override a method of the base class, it must exactly *match the method signature* in the base
class. (Methods defined in `java.lang.Object`, such as `hashCode()` or `equals()`, cannot be
overridden by a role.)

Here are some examples of how to adjust the behavior of method `int A.m(int)`:

```java
/* Add behavior around, before or after the base method */
public @Role class R1 {
  private @Base A base;
  public int m(int x) {
    System.out.println("Before");
    int r = base.m(x);
    System.out.println("After");
    return r;
  }
}
/* Replace the base method */
public @Role class R2 {
  private @Base A base;
  public int m(int x) {
    // no call to base.m()
    return x * x * x;
  }
}
/* Conditionally replace the base method */
public @Role class R3 {
  private @Base A base;
  public int m(int x) {
    if (x < 42) {
      // no call to base.m()
      return x * x * x;
    }
    return base.m();
  }
}
```

### Compartments

In the RoleVM API, roles depend on compartments. A `@Role` class must be an inner class of a type
that extends `rolevm.api.Compartment`:

```java
import rolevm.api.*;
public MyCompartment extends Compartment {
  public @Role class RoleType {
    private @Base BaseType base;
  }
}
```

### Instantiating and binding roles

Role instantiation and (un)binding are explicit and depend on the compartment.

```java
MyCompartment c = new MyCompartment();
BaseType base = new BaseType();
RoleType role = c.new RoleType();
c.bind(base, role);
c.unbind(base, role);
```

### Running the RoleVM

Invoke `java` with the java agent and the rolevm runtime library on the classpath:

    java -javaagent:rolevm-agent.jar -cp rolevm-runtime.jar pkg.Main

The required JARs can be obtained using `mvn dependency:copy`.

## Current limitations

- Only one role may be bound to an object.
- Roles must be explicitly unbound to make the base (and role) object eligible for garbage
  collection. This is a result of the way RoleVM associates players with roles and vice versa, and
  cannot be fixed without JVM support for [Ephemerons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephemeron). 
- Only classes with a minimum class format version of 1.7 can be transformed.

## Performance

### OT/J callin vs RoleVM basecall overhead

Measured using the synthetic NoopCompartment benchmarks.

OT/J ([benchmark source](https://github.com/martinmo/otjbench)):

    Benchmark                      Mode  Cnt    Score   Error  Units
    NoopCallin.baseline            avgt   10    0,438 ± 0,010  ns/op
    NoopCallin.callinTest          avgt   10  232,749 ± 6,563  ns/op
    NoopCallin.callinWithArgsTest  avgt   10  253,201 ± 7,882  ns/op

RoleVM ([benchmark source](rolevm-bench/src/main/java/rolevm/bench/noop)):

    Benchmark                                   Mode  Cnt   Score   Error  Units
    NoopCompartmentBenchmark.basecall_noargs    avgt   10  40,275 ± 1,397  ns/op
    NoopCompartmentBenchmark.basecall_withargs  avgt   10  57,960 ± 2,435  ns/op
    NoopCompartmentBenchmark.baseline           avgt   10   0,434 ± 0,019  ns/op

## License and copyright

See [LICENSE](LICENSE).

Commit message:

Configure the dependency:copy goal

README.md, after:

# RoleVM

RoleVM is a minimal, efficient role-based programming runtime for Java, based on
`java.lang.invoke` and `jdk.dynalink`. It is entirely written in Java and consists of a small Java
agent and an accompanying runtime library.

## How does it work?

- The RoleVM agent replaces every `invoke{interface,virtual}` instruction in all loaded Java
  classes (except in some blacklisted packages) with equivalent `invokedynamic` instructions. We
  refer to such modified call sites as dynamic call sites.
- At each dynamic call site, a sender argument is pushed to the stack as an additional argument,
  which will later be used during dynamic method dispatch, e.g., to detect base calls or support
  multiple roles per player in a future version of RoleVM.
- Dynamic method dispatch takes sender, receiver and bound roles into account and "jumps" to the
  matching method implementation. The additional sender argument is dropped after the dispatch
  decision has been made.
- A *polymorphic inline cache* is used to cache dispatch decisions at the call site.

For more details, please read the Javadocs. An aggregated Javadoc for all Maven subprojects can be
generated using `mvn javadoc:aggregate`.

## Build

The library is not yet available on Maven Central. You have to build and install it locally using
`mvn install` (requires JDK 9).

Furthermore, it is decoupled into multiple subprojects:

    rolevm
    ├── rolevm-agent
    ├── rolevm-api
    ├── rolevm-bench
    ├── rolevm-examples
    └── rolevm-runtime

The `rolevm-{bench,examples}` submodules are non-essential modules and contain benchmarks and usage
examples.

## Usage

The best way to see RoleVM in action is to take a look at the demos in the `rolevm-examples`
subproject.

### Maven coordinates

First, to use the library, you have to declare a `provided` dependency on the `rolevm-api` Maven
artifact:

```xml
<dependency>
  <groupId>com.github.martinmo.rolevm</groupId>
  <artifactId>rolevm-api</artifactId>
  <version>1.0-SNAPSHOT</version>
  <scope>provided</scope>
</dependency>
```

### Role and Base annotations

The RoleVM API can bind roles to arbitrary objects, and base and role types are *not* required to
implement some particular interface or extend a particular class. Instead, role types are annotated
using `@Role` and `@Base` annotations:

```java
import rolevm.api.*;
public @Role class RoleType {
  private @Base BaseType base;
}
```

#### Around, Before, After and Replace

Suppose you have a class `A` that you want to use as a base:

```java
public class A {
  public int m(int x) {
    return x * x;
  }
}
```

Then the accompanying, minimum role definition looks like this:

```java
public @Role class R {
  private @Base A base;
}
```

To override a method of the base class, it must exactly *match the method signature* in the base
class. (Methods defined in `java.lang.Object`, such as `hashCode()` or `equals()`, cannot be
overridden by a role.)

Here are some examples of how to adjust the behavior of method `int A.m(int)`:

```java
/* Add behavior around, before or after the base method */
public @Role class R1 {
  private @Base A base;
  public int m(int x) {
    System.out.println("Before");
    int r = base.m(x);
    System.out.println("After");
    return r;
  }
}
/* Replace the base method */
public @Role class R2 {
  private @Base A base;
  public int m(int x) {
    // no call to base.m()
    return x * x * x;
  }
}
/* Conditionally replace the base method */
public @Role class R3 {
  private @Base A base;
  public int m(int x) {
    if (x < 42) {
      // no call to base.m()
      return x * x * x;
    }
    return base.m();
  }
}
```

### Compartments

In the RoleVM API, roles depend on compartments. A `@Role` class must be an inner class of a type
that extends `rolevm.api.Compartment`:

```java
import rolevm.api.*;
public MyCompartment extends Compartment {
  public @Role class RoleType {
    private @Base BaseType base;
  }
}
```

### Instantiating and binding roles

Role instantiation and (un)binding are explicit and depend on the compartment.

```java
MyCompartment c = new MyCompartment();
BaseType base = new BaseType();
RoleType role = c.new RoleType();
c.bind(base, role);
c.unbind(base, role);
```

### Running the RoleVM

Invoke `java` with the java agent and the rolevm runtime library on the classpath:

    java -javaagent:rolevm-agent.jar -cp rolevm-runtime.jar pkg.Main

The required JARs can be obtained using the `dependency:copy` goal:

    mvn dependency:copy -DoutputDirectory=path/to/a/directory

## Current limitations

- Only one role may be bound to an object.
- Roles must be explicitly unbound to make the base (and role) object eligible for garbage
  collection. This is a result of the way RoleVM associates players with roles and vice versa, and
  cannot be fixed without JVM support for [Ephemerons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephemeron). 
- Only classes with a minimum class format version of 1.7 can be transformed.

## Performance

### OT/J callin vs RoleVM basecall overhead

Measured using the synthetic NoopCompartment benchmarks.

OT/J ([benchmark source](https://github.com/martinmo/otjbench)):

    Benchmark                      Mode  Cnt    Score   Error  Units
    NoopCallin.baseline            avgt   10    0,438 ± 0,010  ns/op
    NoopCallin.callinTest          avgt   10  232,749 ± 6,563  ns/op
    NoopCallin.callinWithArgsTest  avgt   10  253,201 ± 7,882  ns/op

RoleVM ([benchmark source](rolevm-bench/src/main/java/rolevm/bench/noop)):

    Benchmark                                   Mode  Cnt   Score   Error  Units
    NoopCompartmentBenchmark.basecall_noargs    avgt   10  40,275 ± 1,397  ns/op
    NoopCompartmentBenchmark.basecall_withargs  avgt   10  57,960 ± 2,435  ns/op
    NoopCompartmentBenchmark.baseline           avgt   10   0,434 ± 0,019  ns/op

## License and copyright

See [LICENSE](LICENSE).
